The Project Gutenberg eBook of Eight Cousins
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Eight Cousins

Author: Louisa May Alcott

Release date: July 1, 2001 [eBook #2726]
                Most recently updated: May 20, 2019

Language: English

Credits: Produced by David Reed, and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EIGHT COUSINS ***




Produced by David Reed


**********************************************************************
THIS EBOOK WAS ONE OF PROJECT GUTENBERG'S EARLY FILES PRODUCED AT A
TIME WHEN PROOFING METHODS AND TOOLS WERE NOT WELL DEVELOPED. THERE IS
AN IMPROVED EDITION OF THIS TITLE WHICH MAY BE VIEWED AT EBOOK (#38567)
**********************************************************************





EIGHT COUSINS

By Louisa M. Alcott




Preface

The Author is quite aware of the defects of this little story, many of
which were unavoidable, as it first appeared serially. But, as Uncle
Alec's experiment was intended to amuse the young folks, rather than
suggest educational improvements for the consideration of the elders,
she trusts that these shortcomings will be overlooked by the friends of
the Eight Cousins, and she will try to make amends in a second volume,
which shall attempt to show The Rose in Bloom.

L.M.A.




Chapter 1--Two Girls

Rose sat all alone in the big best parlor, with her little handkerchief
laid ready to catch the first tear, for she was thinking of her
troubles, and a shower was expected. She had retired to this room as a
good place in which to be miserable; for it was dark and still, full of
ancient furniture, sombre curtains, and hung all around with portraits
of solemn old gentlemen in wigs, severe-nosed ladies in top-heavy caps,
and staring children in little bob-tailed coats or short-waisted frocks.
It was an excellent place for woe; and the fitful spring rain that
pattered on the window-pane seemed to sob, “Cry away: I'm with you.”

Rose really did have some cause to be sad; for she had no mother, and
had lately lost her father also, which left her no home but this with
her great-aunts. She had been with them only a week, and, though the
dear old ladies had tried their best to make her happy, they had not
succeeded very well, for she was unlike any child they had ever seen,
and they felt very much as if they had the care of a low-spirited
butterfly.

They had given her the freedom of the house, and for a day or two
she had amused herself roaming all over it, for it was a capital old
mansion, and was full of all manner of odd nooks, charming rooms, and
mysterious passages. Windows broke out in unexpected places, little
balconies overhung the garden most romantically, and there was a long
upper hall full of curiosities from all parts of the world; for the
Campbells had been sea-captains for generations.

Aunt Plenty had even allowed Rose to rummage in her great china closet
a spicy retreat, rich in all the “goodies” that children love; but Rose
seemed to care little for these toothsome temptations; and when that
hope failed, Aunt Plenty gave up in despair.

Gentle Aunt Peace had tried all sorts of pretty needle-work, and planned
a doll's wardrobe that would have won the heart of even an older child.
But Rose took little interest in pink satin hats and tiny hose, though
she sewed dutifully till her aunt caught her wiping tears away with the
train of a wedding-dress, and that discovery put an end to the sewing
society.

Then both old ladies put their heads together and picked out the model
child of the neighbourhood to come and play with their niece. But
Ariadne Blish was the worst failure of all, for Rose could not bear the
sight of her, and said she was so like a wax doll she longed to give
her a pinch and see if she would squeak. So prim little Ariadne was sent
home, and the exhausted aunties left Rose to her own devices for a day
or two.

Bad weather and a cold kept her in-doors, and she spent most of her time
in the library where her father's books were stored. Here she read a
great deal, cried a little, and dreamed many of the innocent bright
dreams in which imaginative children find such comfort and delight. This
suited her better than anything else, but it was not good for her, and
she grew pale, heavy-eyed and listless, though Aunt Plenty gave her iron
enough to make a cooking-stove, and Aunt Peace petted her like a poodle.

Seeing this, the poor aunties racked their brains for a new amusement
and determined to venture a bold stroke, though not very hopeful of its
success. They said nothing to Rose about their plan for this Saturday
afternoon, but let her alone till the time came for the grand surprise,
little dreaming that the odd child would find pleasure for herself in a
most unexpected quarter.

Before she had time to squeeze out a single tear a sound broke the
stillness, making her prick up her ears. It was only the soft twitter
of a bird, but it seemed to be a peculiarly gifted bird, for while she
listened the soft twitter changed to a lively whistle, then a trill, a
coo, a chirp, and ended in a musical mixture of all the notes, as if the
bird burst out laughing. Rose laughed also, and, forgetting her woes,
jumped up, saying eagerly,

“It is a mocking-bird. Where is it?”

Running down the long hall, she peeped out at both doors, but saw
nothing feathered except a draggle-tailed chicken under a burdock leaf.
She listened again, and the sound seemed to be in the house. Away she
went, much excited by the chase, and following the changeful song, it
led her to the china-closet door.

“In there? How funny!” she said. But when she entered, not a bird
appeared except the everlastingly kissing swallows on the Canton china
that lined the shelves. All of a sudden Rose's face brightened, and,
softly opening the slide, she peered into the kitchen. But the music
had stopped, and all she saw was a girl in a blue apron scrubbing the
hearth. Rose stared about her for a minute, and then asked abruptly,

“Did you hear that mocking-bird?”

“I should call it a phebe-bird,” answered the girl, looking up with a
twinkle in her black eyes.

“Where did it go?”

“It is here still.”

“Where?”

“In my throat. Do you want to hear it?”

“Oh, yes! I'll come in.” And Rose crept through the slide to the wide
shelf on the other side, being too hurried and puzzled to go round by
the door.

The girl wiped her hands, crossed her feet on the little island of
carpet where she was stranded in a sea of soap-suds, and then, sure
enough, out of her slender throat came the swallow's twitter, the
robin's whistle, the blue-jay's call, the thrush's song, the wood-dove's
coo, and many another familiar note, all ending as before with the
musical ecstacy of a bobolink singing and swinging among the meadow
grass on a bright June day.

Rose was so astonished that she nearly fell off her perch, and when the
little concert was over clapped her hands delightedly.

“Oh, it was lovely! Who taught you?”

“The birds,” answered the girl, with a smile, as she fell to work again.

“It is very wonderful! I can sing, but nothing half so fine as that.
What is your name, please?”

“Phebe Moore.”

“I've heard of phebe-birds; but I don't believe the real ones could do
that,” laughed Rose, adding, as she watched with interest the scattering
of dabs of soft soap over the bricks, “May I stay and see you work? It
is very lonely in the parlor.”

“Yes, indeed, if you want to,” answered Phebe, wringing out her cloth in
a capable sort of way that impressed Rose very much.

“It must be fun to swash the water round and dig out the soap. I'd love
to do it, only aunt wouldn't like it, I suppose,” said Rose, quite taken
with the new employment.

“You'd soon get tired, so you'd better keep tidy and look on.”

“I suppose you help your mother a good deal?”

“I haven't got any folks.”

“Why, where do you live, then?”

“I'm going to live here, I hope. Debby wants some one to help round, and
I've come to try for a week.”

“I hope you will stay, for it is very dull,” said Rose, who had taken a
sudden fancy to this girl, who sung like a bird and worked like a woman.

“Hope I shall; for I'm fifteen now, and old enough to earn my own
living. You have come to stay a spell, haven't you?” asked Phebe,
looking up at her guest and wondering how life could be dull to a girl
who wore a silk frock, a daintily frilled apron, a pretty locket, and
had her hair tied up with a velvet snood.

“Yes, I shall stay till my uncle comes. He is my guardian now, and I
don't know what he will do with me. Have you a guardian?”

“My sakes, no! I was left on the poor-house steps a little mite of
a baby, and Miss Rogers took a liking to me, so I've been there ever
since. But she is dead now, and I take care of myself.”

“How interesting! It is like Arabella Montgomery in the 'Gypsy's Child.'
Did you ever read that sweet story?” asked Rose, who was fond of tales
of found-lings, and had read many.

“I don't have any books to read, and all the spare time I get I run off
into the woods; that rests me better than stories,” answered Phebe, as
she finished one job and began on another.

Rose watched her as she got out a great pan of beans to look over, and
wondered how it would seem to have life all work and no play. Presently
Phebe seemed to think it was her turn to ask questions, and said,
wistfully,

“You've had lots of schooling, I suppose?”

“Oh, dear me, yes! I've been at boarding school nearly a year, and I'm
almost dead with lessons. The more I got, the more Miss Power gave me,
and I was so miserable that I 'most cried my eyes out. Papa never gave
me hard things to do, and he always taught me so pleasantly I loved to
study. Oh, we were so happy and so fond of one another! But now he is
gone, and I am left all alone.”

The tear that would not come when Rose sat waiting for it came now of
its own accord two of them in fact and rolled down her cheeks, telling
the tale of love and sorrow better than any words could do it.

For a minute there was no sound in the kitchen but the little daughter's
sobbing and the sympathetic patter of the rain. Phebe stopped rattling
her beans from one pan to another, and her eyes were full of pity as
they rested on the curly head bent down on Rose's knee, for she saw that
the heart under the pretty locket ached with its loss, and the dainty
apron was used to dry sadder tears than any she had ever shed.

Somehow, she felt more contented with her brown calico gown and
blue-checked pinafore; envy changed to compassion; and if she had dared
she would have gone and hugged her afflicted guest.

Fearing that might not be considered proper, she said, in her cheery
voice,

“I'm sure you ain't all alone with such a lot of folks belonging to
you, and all so rich and clever. You'll be petted to pieces, Debby says,
because you are the only girl in the family.”

Phebe's last words made Rose smile in spite of her tears, and she looked
out from behind her apron with an April face, saying in a tone of comic
distress,

“That's one of my troubles! I've got six aunts, and they all want
me, and I don't know any of them very well. Papa named this place the
Aunt-hill, and now I see why.”

Phebe laughed with her as she said encouragingly,

“Everyone calls it so, and it's a real good name, for all the Mrs.
Campbells live handy by, and keep coming up to see the old ladies.”

“I could stand the aunts, but there are dozens of cousins, dreadful
boys all of them, and I detest boys! Some of them came to see me last
Wednesday, but I was lying down, and when auntie came to call me I went
under the quilt and pretended to be asleep. I shall have to see them
some time, but I do dread it so.” And Rose gave a shudder, for, having
lived alone with her invalid father, she knew nothing of boys, and
considered them a species of wild animal.

“Oh! I guess you'll like 'em. I've seen 'em flying round when they
come over from the Point, sometimes in their boats and sometimes
on horseback. If you like boats and horses, you'll enjoy yourself
first-rate.”

“But I don't! I'm afraid of horses, and boats make me ill, and I hate
boys!” And poor Rose wrung her hands at the awful prospect before her.
One of these horrors alone she could have borne, but all together were
too much for her, and she began to think of a speedy return to the
detested school.

Phebe laughed at her woe till the beans danced in the pan, but tried to
comfort her by suggesting a means of relief.

“Perhaps your uncle will take you away where there ain't any boys. Debby
says he is a real kind man, and always bring heaps of nice things when
he comes.”

“Yes, but you see that is another trouble, for I don't know Uncle Alec
at all. He hardly ever came to see us, though he sent me pretty things
very often. Now I belong to him, and shall have to mind him, till I am
eighteen. I may not like him a bit, and I fret about it all the time.”

“Well, I wouldn't borrow trouble, but have a real good time. I'm sure I
should think I was in clover if I had folks and money, and nothing to
do but enjoy myself,” began Phebe, but got no further, for a sudden rush
and tumble outside made them both jump.

“It's thunder,” said Phebe.

“It's a circus!” cried Rose, who from her elevated perch had caught
glimpses of a gay cart of some sort and several ponies with flying manes
and tails.

The sound died away, and the girls were about to continue their
confidences when old Debby appeared, looking rather cross and sleepy
after her nap.

“You are wanted in the parlor, Miss Rose.”

“Has anybody come?”

“Little girls shouldn't ask questions, but do as they are bid,” was all
Debby would answer.

“I do hope it isn't Aunt Myra; she always scares me out of my wits
asking how my cough is, and groaning over me as if I was going to die,”
 said Rose, preparing to retire the way she came, for the slide, being
cut for the admission of bouncing Christmas turkeys and puddings, was
plenty large enough for a slender girl.

“Guess you'll wish it was Aunt Myra when you see who has come. Don't
never let me catch you coming into my kitchen that way again, or I'll
shut you up in the big b'iler,” growled Debby, who thought it her duty
to snub children on all occasions.



Chapter 2--The Clan

Rose scrambled into the china-closet as rapidly as possible, and there
refreshed herself by making faces at Debby, while she settled her
plumage and screwed up her courage. Then she crept softly down the hall
and peeped into the parlor. No one appeared, and all was so still she
felt sure the company was upstairs. So she skipped boldly through the
half-open folding-doors, to behold on the other side a sight that nearly
took her breath away.

Seven boys stood in a row all ages, all sizes, all yellow-haired and
blue-eyed, all in full Scotch costume, and all smiling, nodding, and
saying as with one voice, “How are you, cousin?”

Rose gave a little gasp, and looked wildly about her as if ready to fly,
for fear magnified the seven and the room seemed full of boys. Before
she could run, however, the tallest lad stepped out of the line, saying
pleasantly,

“Don't be frightened. This is the Clan come to welcome you; and I'm the
chief, Archie, at your service.”

He held out his hand as he spoke, and Rose timidly put her own into a
brown paw, which closed over the white morsel and held it as the chief
continued his introductions.

“We came in full rig, for we always turn out in style on grand
occasions. Hope you like it. Now I'll tell you who these chaps are, and
then we shall be all right. This big one is Prince Charlie, Aunt Clara's
boy. She has but one, so he is an extra good one. This old fellow is
Mac, the bookworm, called Worm for short. This sweet creature is Steve
the Dandy. Look at his gloves and top-knot, if you please. They are Aunt
Jane's lads, and a precious pair you'd better believe. These are the
Brats, my brothers, Geordie and Will, and Jamie the Baby. Now, my men,
step out and show your manners.”

At this command, to Rose's great dismay, six more hands were offered,
and it was evident that she was expected to shake them all. It was a
trying moment to the bashful child; but, remembering that they were her
kinsmen come to welcome her, she tried her best to return the greeting
cordially.

This impressive ceremony being over, the Clan broke ranks, and both
rooms instantly appeared to be pervaded with boys. Rose hastily retired
to the shelter of a big chair and sat there watching the invaders and
wondering when her aunt would come and rescue her.

As if bound to do their duty manfully, yet rather oppressed by it, each
lad paused beside her chair in his wanderings, made a brief remark,
received a still briefer answer, and then sheered off with a relieved
expression.

Archie came first, and, leaning over the chair-back, observed in a
paternal tone,

“I'm glad you've come, cousin, and I hope you'll find the Aunt-hill
pretty jolly.”

“I think I shall.”

Mac shook his hair out of his eyes, stumbled over a stool, and asked
abruptly,

“Did you bring any books with you?”

“Four boxes full. They are in the library.”

Mac vanished from the room, and Steve, striking an attitude which
displayed his costume effectively, said with an affable smile,

“We were sorry not to see you last Wednesday. I hope your cold is
better.”

“Yes, thank you.” And a smile began to dimple about Rose's mouth, as she
remembered her retreat under the bed-cover.

Feeling that he had been received with distinguished marks of attention,
Steve strolled away with his topknot higher than ever, and Prince
Charlie pranced across the room, saying in a free and easy tone,

“Mamma sent her love and hopes you will be well enough to come over for
a day next week. It must be desperately dull here for a little thing
like you.”

“I'm thirteen and a half, though I do look small,” cried Rose,
forgetting her shyness in indignation at this insult to her newly
acquired teens.

“Beg pardon, ma'am; never should have guessed it.” And Charlie went off
with a laugh, glad to have struck a spark out of his meek cousin.

Geordie and Will came together, two sturdy eleven and twelve year
olders, and, fixing their round blue eyes on Rose, fired off a question
apiece, as if it was a shooting match and she the target.

“Did you bring your monkey?”

“No; he is dead.”

“Are you going to have a boat?”

“I hope not.”

Here the two, with a right-about-face movement, abruptly marched away,
and little Jamie demanded with childish frankness,

“Did you bring me anything nice?”

“Yes, lots of candy,” answered Rose, whereupon Jamie ascended into her
lap with a sounding kiss and the announcement that he liked her very
much.

This proceeding rather startled Rose, for the other lads looked and
laughed, and in her confusion she said hastily to the young usurper,

“Did you see the circus go by?”

“When? Where?” cried all the boys in great excitement at once.

“Just before you came. At least I thought it was a circus, for I saw a
red and black sort of cart and ever so many little ponies, and--”

She got no farther, for a general shout made her pause suddenly, as
Archie explained the joke by saying in the middle of his laugh,

“It was our new dog-cart and the Shetland ponies. You'll never hear the
last of your circus, cousin.”

“But there were so many, and they went so fast, and the cart was so very
red,” began Rose, trying to explain her mistake.

“Come and see them all!” cried the Prince. And before she knew what was
happening, she was borne away to the barn and tumultuously introduced to
three shaggy ponies and the gay new dog-cart.

She had never visited these regions before, and had her doubts as to the
propriety of her being there now, but when she suggested that “Auntie
might not like it,” there was a general cry of,

“She told us to amuse you, and we can do it ever so much better out here
than poking round in the house.”

“I'm afraid I shall get cold without my sacque,” began Rose, who wanted
to stay, but felt rather out of her element.

“No, you won't! We'll fix you,” cried the lads, as one clapped his cap
on her head, another tied a rough jacket round her neck by the sleeves,
a third neatly smothered her in a carriage blanket, and a fourth threw
open the door of the old barouche that stood there, saying with a
flourish,

“Step in, ma'am, and make yourself comfortable while we show you some
fun.”

So Rose sat in state enjoying herself very much, for the lads proceeded
to dance a Highland Fling with a spirit and skill that made her clap her
hands and laugh as she had not done for weeks.

“How is that, my lassie?” asked the Prince, coming up all flushed and
breathless when the ballet was over.

“It was splendid! I never went to the theatre but once, and the dancing
was not half so pretty as this. What clever boys you must be!” said
Rose, smiling upon her kinsmen like a little queen upon her subjects.

“Ah, we're a fine lot, and that is only the beginning of our larks. We
haven't got the pipes here or we'd,

    'Sing for you, play for you
     A dulcy melody,'”

answered Charlie, looking much elated at her praise.

“I did not know we were Scotch; papa never said anything about it, or
seemed to care about Scotland, except to have me sing the old ballads,”
 said Rose, beginning to feel as if she had left America behind her
somewhere.

“Neither did we till lately. We've been reading Scott's novels, and all
of a sudden we remembered that our grandfather was a Scotchman. So we
hunted up the old stories, got a bagpipe, put on our plaids, and went
in, heart and soul, for the glory of the Clan. We've been at it some
time now, and it's great fun. Our people like it, and I think we are a
pretty canny set.”

Archie said this from the other coach-step, where he had perched,
while the rest climbed up before and behind to join in the chat as they
rested.

“I'm Fitzjames and he's Roderick Dhu, and we'll give you the broadsword
combat some day. It's a great thing, you'd better believe,” added the
Prince.

“Yes, and you should hear Steve play the pipes. He makes 'em skirl like
a good one,” cried Will from the box, eager to air the accomplishments
of his race.

“Mac's the fellow to hunt up the old stories and tell us how to dress
right, and pick out rousing bits for us to speak and sing,” put in
Geordie, saying a good word for the absent Worm.

“And what do you and Will do?” asked Rose of Jamie, who sat beside her
as if bound to keep her in sight till the promised gift had been handed
over.

“Oh, I'm the little foot-page, and do errands, and Will and Geordie are
the troops when we march, and the stags when we hunt, and the traitors
when we want to cut any heads off.”

“They are very obliging, I'm sure,” said Rose, whereat the “utility men”
 beamed with modest pride and resolved to enact Wallace and Montrose as
soon as possible for their cousin's special benefit.

“Let's have a game of tag,” cried the Prince, swinging himself up to a
beam with a sounding slap on Stevie's shoulder.

Regardless of his gloves, Dandy tore after him, and the rest swarmed in
every direction as if bent on breaking their necks and dislocating their
joints as rapidly as possible.

It was a new and astonishing spectacle to Rose, fresh from a prim
boarding-school, and she watched the active lads with breathless
interest, thinking their antics far superior to those of Mops, the dear
departed monkey.

Will had just covered himself with glory by pitching off a high loft
head first and coming up all right, when Phebe appeared with a cloak,
hood, and rubbers, also a message from Aunt Plenty that “Miss Rose was
to come in directly.”

“All right; we'll bring her!” answered Archie, issuing some mysterious
order, which was so promptly obeyed that, before Rose could get out of
the carriage, the boys had caught hold of the pole and rattled her out
of the barn, round the oval and up to the front door with a cheer that
brought two caps to an upper window, and caused Debby to cry aloud from
the back porch,

“Them harum-scarum boys will certainly be the death of that delicate
little creter!”

But the “delicate little creter” seemed all the better for her trip, and
ran up the steps looking rosy, gay, and dishevelled, to be received with
lamentation by Aunt Plenty, who begged her to go and lie down at once.

“Oh, please don't! We have come to tea with our cousin, and we'll be as
good as gold if you'll let us stay, auntie,” clamoured the boys, who
not only approved of “our cousin” but had no mind to lose their tea, for
Aunt Plenty's name but feebly expressed her bountiful nature.

“Well, dears, you can; only be quiet, and let Rose go and take her iron
and be made tidy, and then we will see what we can find for supper,”
 said the old lady as she trotted away, followed by a volley of
directions for the approaching feast.

“Marmalade for me, auntie.”

“Plenty of plum-cake, please.”

“Tell Debby to trot out the baked pears.”

“I'm your man for lemon-pie, ma'am.”

“Do have fritters; Rose will like 'em.”

“She'd rather have tarts, I know.”

When Rose came down, fifteen minutes later, with every curl smoothed and
her most beruffled apron on, she found the boys loafing about the long
hall, and paused on the half-way landing to take an observation, for
till now she had not really examined her new-found cousins.

There was a strong family resemblance among them, though some of the
yellow heads were darker than others, some of the cheeks brown instead
of rosy, and the ages varied all the way from sixteen-year-old Archie
to Jamie, who was ten years younger. None of them were especially
comely but the Prince, yet all were hearty, happy-looking lads, and Rose
decided that boys were not as dreadful as she had expected to find them.

They were all so characteristically employed that she could not help
smiling as she looked. Archie and Charlie, evidently great cronies, were
pacing up and down, shoulder to shoulder, whistling “Bonnie Dundee”; Mac
was reading in a corner, with his book close to his near-sighted eyes;
Dandy was arranging his hair before the oval glass in the hat-stand;
Geordie and Will investigating the internal economy of the moon-faced
clock; and Jamie lay kicking up his heels on the mat at the foot of the
stairs, bent on demanding his sweeties the instant Rose appeared.

She guessed his intention, and forestalled his demand by dropping a
handful of sugar-plums down upon him.

At his cry of rapture the other lads looked up and smiled involuntarily,
for the little kinswoman standing there above was a winsome sight with
her shy, soft eyes, bright hair, and laughing face. The black frock
reminded them of her loss, and filled the boyish hearts with a kindly
desire to be good to “our cousin,” who had no longer any home but this.

“There she is, as fine as you please,” cried Steve, kissing his hand to
her.

“Come on, Missy; tea is ready,” added the Prince encouragingly.

“I shall take her in.” And Archie offered his arm with great dignity, an
honour that made Rose turn as red as a cherry and long to run upstairs
again.

It was a merry supper, and the two elder boys added much to the fun by
tormenting the rest with dark hints of some interesting event which was
about to occur. Something uncommonly fine, they declared it was, but
enveloped in the deepest mystery for the present.

“Did I ever see it?” asked Jamie.

“Not to remember it; but Mac and Steve have, and liked it immensely,”
 answered Archie, thereby causing the two mentioned to neglect Debby's
delectable fritters for several minutes, while they cudgelled their
brains.

“Who will have it first?” asked Will, with his mouth full of marmalade.

“Aunt Plenty, I guess.”

“When will she have it?” demanded Geordie, bouncing in his seat with
impatience.

“Sometime on Monday.”

“Heart alive! what is the boy talking about?” cried the old lady from
behind the tall urn, which left little to be seen but the topmost bow of
her cap.

“Doesn't auntie know?” asked a chorus of voices.

“No; and that's the best of the joke, for she is desperately fond of
it.”

“What colour is it?” asked Rose, joining in the fun.

“Blue and brown.”

“Is it good to eat?” asked Jamie.

“Some people think so, but I shouldn't like to try it,” answered
Charlie, laughing so he split his tea.

“Who does it belong to?” put in Steve.

Archie and the Prince stared at one another rather blankly for a minute,
then Archie answered with a twinkle of the eye that made Charlie explode
again,

“To Grandfather Campbell.”

This was a poser, and they gave up the puzzle, though Jamie confided
to Rose that he did not think he could live till Monday without knowing
what this remarkable thing was.

Soon after tea the Clan departed, singing “All the blue bonnets are over
the border,” at the tops of their voices.

“Well, dear, how do you like your cousins?” asked Aunt Plenty, as the
last pony frisked round the corner and the din died away.

“Pretty well, ma'am; but I like Phebe better.” An answer which caused
Aunt Plenty to hold up her hands in despair and trot away to tell sister
Peace that she never should understand that child, and it was a mercy
Alec was coming soon to take the responsibility off their hands.

Fatigued by the unusual exertions of the afternoon, Rose curled herself
up in the sofa corner to rest and think about the great mystery, little
guessing that she was to know it first of all.

Right in the middle of her meditations she fell asleep and dreamed she
was at home again in her own little bed. She seemed to wake and see her
father bending over her; to hear him say, “My little Rose”; to answer,
“Yes, papa”; and then to feel him take her in his arms and kiss her
tenderly. So sweet, so real was the dream, that she started up with a
cry of joy to find herself in the arms of a brown, bearded man, who held
her close, and whispered in a voice so like her father's that she clung
to him involuntarily,

“This is my little girl, and I am Uncle Alec.”



Chapter 3--Uncles

When Rose woke next morning, she was not sure whether she had dreamed
what occurred the night before, or it had actually happened. So she
hopped up and dressed, although it was an hour earlier than she usually
rose, for she could not sleep any more, being possessed with a strong
desire to slip down and see if the big portmanteau and packing cases
were really in the hall. She seemed to remember tumbling over them when
she went to bed, for the aunts had sent her off very punctually, because
they wanted their pet nephew all to themselves.

The sun was shining, and Rose opened her window to let in the soft May
air fresh from the sea. As she leaned over her little balcony, watching
an early bird get the worm, and wondering how she should like Uncle
Alec, she saw a man leap the garden wall and come whistling up the path.
At first she thought it was some trespasser, but a second look showed
her that it was her uncle returning from an early dip into the sea. She
had hardly dared to look at him the night before, because whenever she
tried to do so she always found a pair of keen blue eyes looking at her.
Now she could take a good stare at him as he lingered along, looking
about him as if glad to see the old place again.

A brown, breezy man, in a blue jacket, with no hat on the curly head,
which he shook now and then like a water dog; broad-shouldered, alert in
his motions, and with a general air of strength and stability about him
which pleased Rose, though she could not explain the feeling of comfort
it gave her. She had just said to herself, with a sense of relief, “I
guess I shall like him, though he looks as if he made people mind,” when
he lifted his eyes to examine the budding horse-chestnut overhead,
and saw the eager face peering down at him. He waved his hand to her,
nodded, and called out in a bluff, cheery voice,

“You are on deck early, little niece.”

“I got up to see if you had really come, uncle.”

“Did you? Well, come down here and make sure of it.”

“I'm not allowed to go out before breakfast, sir.”

“Oh, indeed!” with a shrug. “Then I'll come aboard and salute,” he
added; and, to Rose's great amazement, Uncle Alec went up one of the
pillars of the back piazza hand over hand, stepped across the roof,
and swung himself into her balcony, saying, as he landed on the wide
balustrade: “Have you any doubts about me now, ma'am?”

Rose was so taken aback, she could only answer with a smile as she went
to meet him.

“How does my girl do this morning?” he asked, taking the little cold
hand she gave him in both his big warm ones.

“Pretty well, thank you, sir.”

“Ah, but it should be very well. Why isn't it?”

“I always wake up with a headache, and feel tired.”

“Don't you sleep well?”

“I lie awake a long time, and then I dream, and my sleep does not seem
to rest me much.”

“What do you do all day?”

“Oh, I read, and sew a little, and take naps, and sit with auntie.”

“No running about out of doors, or house-work, or riding, hey?”

“Aunt Plenty says I'm not strong enough for much exercise. I drive out
with her sometimes, but I don't care for it.”

“I'm not surprised at that,” said Uncle Alec, half to himself, adding,
in his quick way: “Who have you had to play with?”

“No one but Ariadne Blish, and she was such a goose I couldn't bear
her. The boys came yesterday, and seemed rather nice; but, of course, I
couldn't play with them.”

“Why not?”

“I'm too old to play with boys.”

“Not a bit of it; that's just what you need, for you've been
molly-coddled too much. They are good lads, and you'll be mixed up with
them more or less for years to come, so you may as well be friends and
playmates at once. I will look you up some girls also, if I can find a
sensible one who is not spoilt by her nonsensical education.”

“Phebe is sensible, I'm sure, and I like her, though I only saw her
yesterday,” cried Rose, waking up suddenly.

“And who is Phebe, if you please?”

Rose eagerly told all she knew, and Uncle Alec listened, with an odd
smile lurking about his mouth, though his eyes were quite sober as he
watched the face before him.

“I'm glad to see that you are not aristocratic in your tastes, but I
don't quite make out why you like this young lady from the poor-house.”

“You may laugh at me, but I do. I can't tell why, only she seems so
happy and busy, and sings so beautifully, and is strong enough to scrub
and sweep, and hasn't any troubles to plague her,” said Rose, making a
funny jumble of reasons in her efforts to explain.

“How do you know that?”

“Oh, I was telling her about mine, and asked if she had any, and she
said, 'No, only I'd like to go to school, and I mean to some day.”

“So she doesn't call desertion, poverty, and hard work, troubles? She's
a brave little girl, and I shall be proud to know her.” And Uncle Alec
gave an approving nod, that made Rose wish she had been the one to earn
it.

“But what are these troubles of yours, child?” he asked, after a minute
of silence.

“Please don't ask me, uncle.”

“Can't you tell them to me as well as to Phebe?”

Something in his tone made Rose feel that it would be better to speak
out and be done with it, so she answered, with sudden colour and averted
eyes,

“The greatest one was losing dear papa.”

As she said that, Uncle Alec's arm came gently round her, and he drew
her to him, saying, in the voice so like papa's,

“That is a trouble which I cannot cure, my child; but I shall try to
make you feel it less. What else, dear?”

“I am so tired and poorly all the time, I can't do anything I want to,
and it makes me cross,” sighed Rose, rubbing the aching head like a
fretful child.

“That we can cure and we will,” said her uncle, with a decided nod
that made the curls bob on his head, to that Rose saw the gray ones
underneath the brown.

“Aunt Myra says I have no constitution, and never shall be strong,”
 observed Rose, in a pensive tone, as if it was rather a nice thing to be
an invalid.

“Aunt Myra is a ahem! an excellent woman, but it is her hobby to believe
that everyone is tottering on the brink of the grave; and, upon my life,
I believe she is offended if people don't fall into it! We will show her
how to make constitutions and turn pale-faced little ghosts into rosy,
hearty girls. That's my business, you know,” he added, more quietly, for
his sudden outburst had rather startled Rose.

“I had forgotten you were a doctor. I'm glad of it, for I do want to be
well, only I hope you won't give me much medicine, for I've taken quarts
already, and it does me no good.”

As she spoke, Rose pointed to a little table just inside the window, on
which appeared a regiment of bottles.

“Ah, ha! Now we'll see what mischief these blessed women have been at.”
 And, making a long arm, Dr. Alec set the bottles on the wide railing
before him, examined each carefully, smiled over some, frowned over
others, and said, as he put down the last: “Now I'll show you the best
way to take these messes.” And, as quick as a flash, he sent one after
another smashing down into the posy-beds below.

“But Aunt Plenty won't like it; and Aunt Myra will be angry, for she
sent most of them!” cried Rose, half frightened and half pleased at such
energetic measures.

“You are my patient now, and I'll take the responsibility. My way of
giving physic is evidently the best, for you look better already,” he
said, laughing so infectiously that Rose followed suit, saying saucily,

“If I don't like your medicines any better than those, I shall throw
them into the garden, and then what will you do?”

“When I prescribe such rubbish, I'll give you leave to pitch it
overboard as soon as you like. Now what is the next trouble?”

“I hoped you would forget to ask.”

“But how can I help you if I don't know them? Come, let us have No. 3.”

“It is very wrong, I suppose, but I do sometimes wish I had not quite so
many aunts. They are all very good to me, and I want to please them; but
they are so different, I feel sort of pulled to pieces among them,” said
Rose, trying to express the emotions of a stray chicken with six hens
all clucking over it at once.

Uncle Alec threw back his head and laughed like a boy, for he could
entirely understand how the good ladies had each put in her oar and
tried to paddle her own way, to the great disturbance of the waters and
the entire bewilderment of poor Rose.

“I intend to try a course of uncles now, and see how that suits your
constitution. I'm going to have you all to myself, and no one is to give
a word of advice unless I ask it. There is no other way to keep order
aboard, and I am captain of this little craft, for a time at least. What
comes next?”

But Rose stuck there, and grew so red, her uncle guessed what that
trouble was.

“I don't think I can tell this one. It wouldn't be polite, and I feel
pretty sure that it isn't going to be a trouble any more.”

As she blushed and stammered over these words, Dr. Alec turned his eyes
away to the distant sea, and said so seriously, so tenderly, that she
felt every word and long remembered them,

“My child, I don't expect you to love and trust me all at once, but I do
want you to believe that I shall give my whole heart to this new duty;
and if I make mistakes, as I probably shall, no one will grieve over
them more bitterly than I. It is my fault that I am a stranger to you,
when I want to be your best friend. That is one of my mistakes, and I
never repented it more deeply than I do now. Your father and I had a
trouble once, and I thought I could never forgive him; so I kept away
for years. Thank God, we made it all up the last time I saw him, and he
told me then, that if he was forced to leave her he should bequeath his
little girl to me as a token of his love. I can't fill his place, but
I shall try to be a father to her; and if she learns to love me half as
well as she did the good one she has lost, I shall be a proud and happy
man. Will she believe this and try?”

Something in Uncle Alec's face touched Rose to the heart, and when he
held out his hand with that anxious troubled look in his eyes, she was
moved to put up her innocent lips and seal the contract with a confiding
kiss. The strong arm held her close a minute, and she felt the broad
chest heave once as if with a great sigh of relief; but not a word was
spoken till a tap at the door made both start.

Rose popped her head through the window to say “come in,” while Dr. Alec
hastily rubbed the sleeve of his jacket across his eyes and began to
whistle again.

Phebe appeared with a cup of coffee.

“Debby told me to bring this and help you get up,” she said, opening her
black eyes wide, as if she wondered how on earth “the sailor man” got
there.

“I'm all dressed, so I don't need any help. I hope that is good and
strong,” added Rose, eyeing the steaming cup with an eager look.

But she did not get it, for a brown hand took possession of it as her
uncle said quickly,

“Hold hard, my lass, and let me overhaul that dose before you take it.
Do you drink all this strong coffee every morning, Rose?”

“Yes, sir, and I like it. Auntie says it 'tones' me up, and I always
feel better after it.”

“This accounts for the sleepless nights, the flutter your heart gets
into at the least start, and this is why that cheek of yours is pale
yellow instead of rosy red. No more coffee for you, my dear, and by and
by you'll see that I am right. Any new milk downstairs, Phebe?”

“Yes, sir, plenty right in from the barn.”

“That's the drink for my patient. Go bring me a pitcherful, and another
cup; I want a draught myself. This won't hurt the honeysuckles, for they
have no nerves to speak of.” And, to Rose's great discomfort, the coffee
went after the medicine.

