The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Haunted Bookshop
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Haunted Bookshop

Author: Christopher Morley

Release date: October 1, 1994 [eBook #172]
                Most recently updated: January 1, 2021

Language: English

Credits: Updates to this eBook were provided by Andrew Sly


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAUNTED BOOKSHOP ***














Updates to this eBook were provided by Andrew Sly.





THE HAUNTED BOOKSHOP


BY

CHRISTOPHER MORLEY




TO THE BOOKSELLERS

Be pleased to know, most worthy, that this little book is dedicated to
you in affection and respect.

The faults of the composition are plain to you all.  I begin merely in
the hope of saying something further of the adventures of ROGER
MIFFLIN, whose exploits in "Parnassus on Wheels" some of you have been
kind enough to applaud.  But then came Miss Titania Chapman, and my
young advertising man fell in love with her, and the two of them rather
ran away with the tale.

I think I should explain that the passage in Chapter VIII, dealing with
the delightful talent of Mr. Sidney Drew, was written before the
lamented death of that charming artist.  But as it was a sincere
tribute, sincerely meant, I have seen no reason for removing it.

Chapters I, II, III, and VI appeared originally in The Bookman, and to
the editor of that admirable magazine I owe thanks for his permission
to reprint.

Now that Roger is to have ten Parnassuses on the road, I am emboldened
to think that some of you may encounter them on their travels.  And if
you do, I hope you will find that these new errants of the Parnassus on
Wheels Corporation are living up to the ancient and honourable
traditions of our noble profession.

CHRISTOPHER MORLEY.

Philadelphia,
  April 28, 1919




The Haunted Bookshop



Chapter I

The Haunted Bookshop


If you are ever in Brooklyn, that borough of superb sunsets and
magnificent vistas of husband-propelled baby-carriages, it is to be
hoped you may chance upon a quiet by-street where there is a very
remarkable bookshop.

This bookshop, which does business under the unusual name "Parnassus at
Home," is housed in one of the comfortable old brown-stone dwellings
which have been the joy of several generations of plumbers and
cockroaches.  The owner of the business has been at pains to remodel
the house to make it a more suitable shrine for his trade, which deals
entirely in second-hand volumes.  There is no second-hand bookshop in
the world more worthy of respect.

It was about six o'clock of a cold November evening, with gusts of rain
splattering upon the pavement, when a young man proceeded uncertainly
along Gissing Street, stopping now and then to look at shop windows as
though doubtful of his way.  At the warm and shining face of a French
rotisserie he halted to compare the number enamelled on the transom
with a memorandum in his hand.  Then he pushed on for a few minutes, at
last reaching the address he sought.  Over the entrance his eye was
caught by the sign:


                       PARNASSUS AT HOME
                       R. AND H. MIFFLIN
                      BOOKLOVERS WELCOME!
                     THIS SHOP IS HAUNTED


He stumbled down the three steps that led into the dwelling of the
muses, lowered his overcoat collar, and looked about.

It was very different from such bookstores as he had been accustomed to
patronize.  Two stories of the old house had been thrown into one: the
lower space was divided into little alcoves; above, a gallery ran round
the wall, which carried books to the ceiling.  The air was heavy with
the delightful fragrance of mellowed paper and leather surcharged with
a strong bouquet of tobacco.  In front of him he found a large placard
in a frame:


     THIS SHOP IS HAUNTED by the ghosts
     Of all great literature, in hosts;

     We sell no fakes or trashes.
     Lovers of books are welcome here,
     No clerks will babble in your ear,

     Please smoke--but don't drop ashes!
                             ----
     Browse as long as you like.
     Prices of all books plainly marked.
     If you want to ask questions, you'll find the proprietor
           where the tobacco smoke is thickest.
     We pay cash for books.
     We have what you want, though you may not know you want it.

          Malnutrition of the reading faculty is a serious thing.

     Let us prescribe for you.

     By R. & H. MIFFLIN,
                                     Proprs.


The shop had a warm and comfortable obscurity, a kind of drowsy dusk,
stabbed here and there by bright cones of yellow light from
green-shaded electrics.  There was an all-pervasive drift of tobacco
smoke, which eddied and fumed under the glass lamp shades.  Passing
down a narrow aisle between the alcoves the visitor noticed that some
of the compartments were wholly in darkness; in others where lamps were
glowing he could see a table and chairs.  In one corner, under a sign
lettered ESSAYS, an elderly gentleman was reading, with a face of
fanatical ecstasy illumined by the sharp glare of electricity; but
there was no wreath of smoke about him so the newcomer concluded he was
not the proprietor.

As the young man approached the back of the shop the general effect
became more and more fantastic.  On some skylight far overhead he could
hear the rain drumming; but otherwise the place was completely silent,
peopled only (so it seemed) by the gurgitating whorls of smoke and the
bright profile of the essay reader.  It seemed like a secret fane, some
shrine of curious rites, and the young man's throat was tightened by a
stricture which was half agitation and half tobacco.  Towering above
him into the gloom were shelves and shelves of books, darkling toward
the roof.  He saw a table with a cylinder of brown paper and twine,
evidently where purchases might be wrapped; but there was no sign of an
attendant.

"This place may indeed be haunted," he thought, "perhaps by the
delighted soul of Sir Walter Raleigh, patron of the weed, but seemingly
not by the proprietors."

His eyes, searching the blue and vaporous vistas of the shop, were
caught by a circle of brightness that shone with a curious egg-like
lustre.  It was round and white, gleaming in the sheen of a hanging
light, a bright island in a surf of tobacco smoke.  He came more close,
and found it was a bald head.

This head (he then saw) surmounted a small, sharp-eyed man who sat
tilted back in a swivel chair, in a corner which seemed the nerve
centre of the establishment.  The large pigeon-holed desk in front of
him was piled high with volumes of all sorts, with tins of tobacco and
newspaper clippings and letters.  An antiquated typewriter, looking
something like a harpsichord, was half-buried in sheets of manuscript.
The little bald-headed man was smoking a corn-cob pipe and reading a
cook-book.

"I beg your pardon," said the caller, pleasantly; "is this the
proprietor?"

Mr. Roger Mifflin, the proprietor of "Parnassus at Home," looked up,
and the visitor saw that he had keen blue eyes, a short red beard, and
a convincing air of competent originality.

"It is," said Mr. Mifflin.  "Anything I can do for you?"

"My name is Aubrey Gilbert," said the young man.  "I am representing
the Grey-Matter Advertising Agency.  I want to discuss with you the
advisability of your letting us handle your advertising account,
prepare snappy copy for you, and place it in large circulation mediums.
Now the war's over, you ought to prepare some constructive campaign for
bigger business."

The bookseller's face beamed.  He put down his cook-book, blew an
expanding gust of smoke, and looked up brightly.

"My dear chap," he said, "I don't do any advertising."

"Impossible!" cried the other, aghast as at some gratuitous indecency.

"Not in the sense you mean.  Such advertising as benefits me most is
done for me by the snappiest copywriters in the business."

"I suppose you refer to Whitewash and Gilt?" said Mr. Gilbert wistfully.

"Not at all.  The people who are doing my advertising are Stevenson,
Browning, Conrad and Company."

"Dear me," said the Grey-Matter solicitor.  "I don't know that agency
at all.  Still, I doubt if their copy has more pep than ours."

"I don't think you get me.  I mean that my advertising is done by the
books I sell.  If I sell a man a book by Stevenson or Conrad, a book
that delights or terrifies him, that man and that book become my living
advertisements."

"But that word-of-mouth advertising is exploded," said Gilbert.  "You
can't get Distribution that way.  You've got to keep your trademark
before the public."

"By the bones of Tauchnitz!" cried Mifflin.  "Look here, you wouldn't
go to a doctor, a medical specialist, and tell him he ought to
advertise in papers and magazines?  A doctor is advertised by the
bodies he cures.  My business is advertised by the minds I stimulate.
And let me tell you that the book business is different from other
trades.  People don't know they want books.  I can see just by looking
at you that your mind is ill for lack of books but you are blissfully
unaware of it!  People don't go to a bookseller until some serious
mental accident or disease makes them aware of their danger.  Then they
come here.  For me to advertise would be about as useful as telling
people who feel perfectly well that they ought to go to the doctor.  Do
you know why people are reading more books now than ever before?
Because the terrific catastrophe of the war has made them realize that
their minds are ill.  The world was suffering from all sorts of mental
fevers and aches and disorders, and never knew it.  Now our mental
pangs are only too manifest.  We are all reading, hungrily, hastily,
trying to find out--after the trouble is over--what was the matter with
our minds."

The little bookseller was standing up now, and his visitor watched him
with mingled amusement and alarm.

"You know," said Mifflin, "I am interested that you should have thought
it worth while to come in here.  It reinforces my conviction of the
amazing future ahead of the book business.  But I tell you that future
lies not merely in systematizing it as a trade.  It lies in dignifying
it as a profession.  It is small use to jeer at the public for craving
shoddy books, quack books, untrue books.  Physician, cure thyself!  Let
the bookseller learn to know and revere good books, he will teach the
customer.  The hunger for good books is more general and more insistent
than you would dream.  But it is still in a way subconscious.  People
need books, but they don't know they need them.  Generally they are not
aware that the books they need are in existence."

"Why wouldn't advertising be the way to let them know?" asked the young
man, rather acutely.

"My dear chap, I understand the value of advertising.  But in my own
case it would be futile.  I am not a dealer in merchandise but a
specialist in adjusting the book to the human need.  Between ourselves,
there is no such thing, abstractly, as a 'good' book.  A book is 'good'
only when it meets some human hunger or refutes some human error.  A
book that is good for me would very likely be punk for you.  My
pleasure is to prescribe books for such patients as drop in here and
are willing to tell me their symptoms.  Some people have let their
reading faculties decay so that all I can do is hold a post mortem on
them.  But most are still open to treatment.  There is no one so
grateful as the man to whom you have given just the book his soul
needed and he never knew it.  No advertisement on earth is as potent as
a grateful customer.

"I will tell you another reason why I don't advertise," he continued.
"In these days when everyone keeps his trademark before the public, as
you call it, not to advertise is the most original and startling thing
one can do to attract attention.  It was the fact that I do NOT
advertise that drew you here.  And everyone who comes here thinks he
has discovered the place himself.  He goes and tells his friends about
the book asylum run by a crank and a lunatic, and they come here in
turn to see what it is like."

"I should like to come here again myself and browse about," said the
advertising agent.  "I should like to have you prescribe for me."

"The first thing needed is to acquire a sense of pity.  The world has
been printing books for 450 years, and yet gunpowder still has a wider
circulation.  Never mind!  Printer's ink is the greater explosive: it
will win.  Yes, I have a few of the good books here.  There are only
about 30,000 really important books in the world.  I suppose about
5,000 of them were written in the English language, and 5,000 more have
been translated."

"You are open in the evenings?"

"Until ten o'clock.  A great many of my best customers are those who
are at work all day and can only visit bookshops at night.  The real
book-lovers, you know, are generally among the humbler classes.  A man
who is impassioned with books has little time or patience to grow rich
by concocting schemes for cozening his fellows."

The little bookseller's bald pate shone in the light of the bulb
hanging over the wrapping table.  His eyes were bright and earnest, his
short red beard bristled like wire.  He wore a ragged brown Norfolk
jacket from which two buttons were missing.

A bit of a fanatic himself, thought the customer, but a very
entertaining one.  "Well, sir," he said, "I am ever so grateful to you.
I'll come again.  Good-night."  And he started down the aisle for the
door.

As he neared the front of the shop, Mr. Mifflin switched on a cluster
of lights that hung high up, and the young man found himself beside a
large bulletin board covered with clippings, announcements, circulars,
and little notices written on cards in a small neat script.  The
following caught his eye:


RX

If your mind needs phosphorus, try "Trivia," by Logan Pearsall Smith.

If your mind needs a whiff of strong air, blue and cleansing, from
hilltops and primrose valleys, try "The Story of My Heart," by Richard
Jefferies.

If your mind needs a tonic of iron and wine, and a thorough
rough-and-tumbling, try Samuel Butler's "Notebooks" or "The Man Who Was
Thursday," by Chesterton.

If you need "all manner of Irish," and a relapse into irresponsible
freakishness, try "The Demi-Gods," by James Stephens.  It is a better
book than one deserves or expects.

It's a good thing to turn your mind upside down now and then, like an
hour-glass, to let the particles run the other way.

One who loves the English tongue can have a lot of fun with a Latin
dictionary.

                                           ROGER MIFFLIN.


Human beings pay very little attention to what is told them unless they
know something about it already.  The young man had heard of none of
these books prescribed by the practitioner of bibliotherapy.  He was
about to open the door when Mifflin appeared at his side.

"Look here," he said, with a quaint touch of embarrassment.  "I was
very much interested by our talk.  I'm all alone this evening--my wife
is away on a holiday.  Won't you stay and have supper with me?  I was
just looking up some new recipes when you came in."

The other was equally surprised and pleased by this unusual invitation.

"Why--that's very good of you," he said.  "Are you sure I won't be
intruding?"

"Not at all!" cried the bookseller.  "I detest eating alone: I was
hoping someone would drop in.  I always try to have a guest for supper
when my wife is away.  I have to stay at home, you see, to keep an eye
on the shop.  We have no servant, and I do the cooking myself.  It's
great fun.  Now you light your pipe and make yourself comfortable for a
few minutes while I get things ready.  Suppose you come back to my den."

On a table of books at the front of the shop Mifflin laid a large card
lettered:


     PROPRIETOR AT SUPPER
     IF YOU WANT ANYTHING
     RING THIS BELL


Beside the card he placed a large old-fashioned dinner bell, and then
led the way to the rear of the shop.

Behind the little office in which this unusual merchant had been
studying his cook-book a narrow stairway rose on each side, running up
to the gallery.  Behind these stairs a short flight of steps led to the
domestic recesses.  The visitor found himself ushered into a small room
on the left, where a grate of coals glowed under a dingy mantelpiece of
yellowish marble.  On the mantel stood a row of blackened corn-cob
pipes and a canister of tobacco.  Above was a startling canvas in
emphatic oils, representing a large blue wagon drawn by a stout white
animal--evidently a horse.  A background of lush scenery enhanced the
forceful technique of the limner.  The walls were stuffed with books.
Two shabby, comfortable chairs were drawn up to the iron fender, and a
mustard-coloured terrier was lying so close to the glow that a smell of
singed hair was sensible.

"There," said the host; "this is my cabinet, my chapel of ease.  Take
off your coat and sit down."

"Really," began Gilbert, "I'm afraid this is----"

"Nonsense!  Now you sit down and commend your soul to Providence and
the kitchen stove.  I'll bustle round and get supper." Gilbert pulled
out his pipe, and with a sense of elation prepared to enjoy an unusual
evening.  He was a young man of agreeable parts, amiable and sensitive.
He knew his disadvantages in literary conversation, for he had gone to
an excellent college where glee clubs and theatricals had left him
little time for reading.  But still he was a lover of good books,
though he knew them chiefly by hearsay.  He was twenty-five years old,
employed as a copywriter by the Grey-Matter Advertising Agency.

The little room in which he found himself was plainly the bookseller's
sanctum, and contained his own private library.  Gilbert browsed along
the shelves curiously.  The volumes were mostly shabby and bruised;
they had evidently been picked up one by one in the humble mangers of
the second-hand vendor.  They all showed marks of use and meditation.

Mr. Gilbert had the earnest mania for self-improvement which has
blighted the lives of so many young men--a passion which, however, is
commendable in those who feel themselves handicapped by a college
career and a jewelled fraternity emblem.  It suddenly struck him that
it would be valuable to make a list of some of the titles in Mifflin's
collection, as a suggestion for his own reading.  He took out a
memorandum book and began jotting down the books that intrigued him:



     The Works of Francis Thompson (3 vols.)
     Social History of Smoking:  Apperson
     The Path to Rome:  Hilaire Belloc
     The Book of Tea:  Kakuzo
     Happy Thoughts:  F. C. Burnand
     Dr. Johnson's Prayers and Meditations
     Margaret Ogilvy:  J. M. Barrie
     Confessions of a Thug:  Taylor
     General Catalogue of the Oxford University Press
     The Morning's War:  C. E. Montague
     The Spirit of Man:  edited by Robert Bridges
     The Romany Rye:  Borrow
     Poems:  Emily Dickinson
     Poems:  George Herbert
     The House of Cobwebs:  George Gissing


So far had he got, and was beginning to say to himself that in the
interests of Advertising (who is a jealous mistress) he had best call a
halt, when his host entered the room, his small face eager, his eyes
blue points of light.

"Come, Mr. Aubrey Gilbert!" he cried.  "The meal is set.  You want to
wash your hands?  Make haste then, this way: the eggs are hot and
waiting."

The dining-room into which the guest was conducted betrayed a feminine
touch not visible in the smoke-dimmed quarters of shop and cabinet.  At
the windows were curtains of laughing chintz and pots of pink geranium.
The table, under a drop-light in a flame-coloured silk screen, was
brightly set with silver and blue china.  In a cut-glass decanter
sparkled a ruddy brown wine.  The edged tool of Advertising felt his
spirits undergo an unmistakable upward pressure.

"Sit down, sir," said Mifflin, lifting the roof of a platter.  "These
are eggs Samuel Butler, an invention of my own, the apotheosis of hen
fruit."

Gilbert greeted the invention with applause.  An Egg Samuel Butler, for
the notebook of housewives, may be summarized as a pyramid, based upon
toast, whereof the chief masonries are a flake of bacon, an egg poached
to firmness, a wreath of mushrooms, a cap-sheaf of red peppers; the
whole dribbled with a warm pink sauce of which the inventor retains the
secret.  To this the bookseller chef added fried potatoes from another
dish, and poured for his guest a glass of wine.

"This is California catawba," said Mifflin, "in which the grape and the
sunshine very pleasantly (and cheaply) fulfil their allotted destiny.
I pledge you prosperity to the black art of Advertising!"

The psychology of the art and mystery of Advertising rests upon tact,
an instinctive perception of the tone and accent which will be en
rapport with the mood of the hearer.  Mr. Gilbert was aware of this,
and felt that quite possibly his host was prouder of his whimsical
avocation as gourmet than of his sacred profession as a bookman.

"Is it possible, sir," he began, in lucid Johnsonian, "that you can
concoct so delicious an entree in so few minutes?  You are not hoaxing
me?  There is no secret passage between Gissing Street and the
laboratories of the Ritz?"

"Ah, you should taste Mrs. Mifflin's cooking!" said the bookseller.  "I
am only an amateur, who dabbles in the craft during her absence.  She
is on a visit to her cousin in Boston.  She becomes, quite justifiably,
weary of the tobacco of this establishment, and once or twice a year it
does her good to breathe the pure serene of Beacon Hill.  During her
absence it is my privilege to inquire into the ritual of housekeeping.
I find it very sedative after the incessant excitement and speculation
of the shop."

"I should have thought," said Gilbert, "that life in a bookshop would
be delightfully tranquil."

"Far from it.  Living in a bookshop is like living in a warehouse of
explosives.  Those shelves are ranked with the most furious
combustibles in the world--the brains of men.  I can spend a rainy
afternoon reading, and my mind works itself up to such a passion and
anxiety over mortal problems as almost unmans me.  It is terribly
nerve-racking.  Surround a man with Carlyle, Emerson, Thoreau,
Chesterton, Shaw, Nietzsche, and George Ade--would you wonder at his
getting excited?  What would happen to a cat if she had to live in a
room tapestried with catnip?  She would go crazy!"

"Truly, I had never thought of that phase of bookselling," said the
young man.  "How is it, though, that libraries are shrines of such
austere calm?  If books are as provocative as you suggest, one would
expect every librarian to utter the shrill screams of a hierophant, to
clash ecstatic castanets in his silent alcoves!"

"Ah, my boy, you forget the card index!  Librarians invented that
soothing device for the febrifuge of their souls, just as I fall back
upon the rites of the kitchen.  Librarians would all go mad, those
capable of concentrated thought, if they did not have the cool and
healing card index as medicament!  Some more of the eggs?"

"Thank you," said Gilbert.  "Who was the butler whose name was
associated with the dish?"

"What?" cried Mifflin, in agitation, "you have not heard of Samuel
Butler, the author of The Way of All Flesh?  My dear young man, whoever
permits himself to die before he has read that book, and also Erewhon,
has deliberately forfeited his chances of paradise.  For paradise in
the world to come is uncertain, but there is indeed a heaven on this
earth, a heaven which we inhabit when we read a good book.  Pour
yourself another glass of wine, and permit me----"

(Here followed an enthusiastic development of the perverse philosophy
of Samuel Butler, which, in deference to my readers, I omit.  Mr.
Gilbert took notes of the conversation in his pocketbook, and I am
pleased to say that his heart was moved to a realization of his
iniquity, for he was observed at the Public Library a few days later
asking for a copy of The Way of All Flesh.  After inquiring at four
libraries, and finding all copies of the book in circulation, he was
compelled to buy one.  He never regretted doing so.)

"But I am forgetting my duties as host," said Mifflin.  "Our dessert
consists of apple sauce, gingerbread, and coffee." He rapidly cleared
the empty dishes from the table and brought on the second course.

"I have been noticing the warning over the sideboard," said Gilbert.
"I hope you will let me help you this evening?"  He pointed to a card
hanging near the kitchen door.  It read:


     ALWAYS WASH DISHES
     IMMEDIATELY AFTER MEALS
     IT SAVES TROUBLE


"I'm afraid I don't always obey that precept," said the bookseller as
he poured the coffee.  "Mrs. Mifflin hangs it there whenever she goes
away, to remind me.  But, as our friend Samuel Butler says, he that is
stupid in little will also be stupid in much.  I have a different
theory about dish-washing, and I please myself by indulging it.

"I used to regard dish-washing merely as an ignoble chore, a kind of
hateful discipline which had to be undergone with knitted brow and
brazen fortitude.  When my wife went away the first time, I erected a
reading stand and an electric light over the sink, and used to read
while my hands went automatically through base gestures of
purification.  I made the great spirits of literature partners of my
sorrow, and learned by heart a good deal of Paradise Lost and of Walt
Mason, while I soused and wallowed among pots and pans.  I used to
comfort myself with two lines of Keats:


     'The moving waters at their priest-like task
     Of pure ablution round earth's human shores----'


Then a new conception of the matter struck me.  It is intolerable for a
human being to go on doing any task as a penance, under duress.  No
matter what the work is, one must spiritualize it in some way, shatter
the old idea of it into bits and rebuild it nearer to the heart's
desire.  How was I to do this with dish-washing?

"I broke a good many plates while I was pondering over the matter.
Then it occurred to me that here was just the relaxation I needed.  I
had been worrying over the mental strain of being surrounded all day
long by vociferous books, crying out at me their conflicting views as
to the glories and agonies of life.  Why not make dish-washing my balm
and poultice?

"When one views a stubborn fact from a new angle, it is amazing how all
its contours and edges change shape!  Immediately my dishpan began to
glow with a kind of philosophic halo!  The warm, soapy water became a
sovereign medicine to retract hot blood from the head; the homely act
of washing and drying cups and saucers became a symbol of the order and
cleanliness that man imposes on the unruly world about him.  I tore
down my book rack and reading lamp from over the sink.

"Mr. Gilbert," he went on, "do not laugh at me when I tell you that I
have evolved a whole kitchen philosophy of my own.  I find the kitchen
the shrine of our civilization, the focus of all that is comely in
life.  The ruddy shine of the stove is as beautiful as any sunset.  A
well-polished jug or spoon is as fair, as complete and beautiful, as
any sonnet.  The dish mop, properly rinsed and wrung and hung outside
the back door to dry, is a whole sermon in itself.  The stars never
look so bright as they do from the kitchen door after the ice-box pan
is emptied and the whole place is 'redd up,' as the Scotch say."

"A very delightful philosophy indeed," said Gilbert.  "And now that we
have finished our meal, I insist upon your letting me give you a hand
with the washing up.  I am eager to test this dish-pantheism of yours!"

"My dear fellow," said Mifflin, laying a restraining hand on his
impetuous guest, "it is a poor philosophy that will not abide denial
now and then.  No, no--I did not ask you to spend the evening with me
to wash dishes."  And he led the way back to his sitting room.

"When I saw you come in," said Mifflin, "I was afraid you might be a
newspaper man, looking for an interview.  A young journalist came to
see us once, with very unhappy results.  He wheedled himself into Mrs.
Mifflin's good graces, and ended by putting us both into a book, called
Parnassus on Wheels, which has been rather a trial to me.  In that book
he attributes to me a number of shallow and sugary observations upon
bookselling that have been an annoyance to the trade.  I am happy to
say, though, that his book had only a trifling sale."

"I have never heard of it," said Gilbert.

"If you are really interested in bookselling you should come here some
evening to a meeting of the Corn Cob Club.  Once a month a number of
booksellers gather here and we discuss matters of bookish concern over
corn-cobs and cider.  We have all sorts and conditions of booksellers:
one is a fanatic on the subject of libraries.  He thinks that every
public library should be dynamited.  Another thinks that moving
pictures will destroy the book trade.  What rot!  Surely everything
that arouses people's minds, that makes them alert and questioning,
increases their appetite for books."

"The life of a bookseller is very demoralizing to the intellect," he
went on after a pause.  "He is surrounded by innumerable books; he
cannot possibly read them all; he dips into one and picks up a scrap
from another.  His mind gradually fills itself with miscellaneous
flotsam, with superficial opinions, with a thousand half-knowledges.
Almost unconsciously he begins to rate literature according to what
people ask for.  He begins to wonder whether Ralph Waldo Trine isn't
really greater than Ralph Waldo Emerson, whether J. M. Chapple isn't as
big a man as J. M. Barrie.  That way lies intellectual suicide.

"One thing, however, you must grant the good bookseller.  He is
tolerant.  He is patient of all ideas and theories.  Surrounded,
engulfed by the torrent of men's words, he is willing to listen to them
all.  Even to the publisher's salesman he turns an indulgent ear.  He
is willing to be humbugged for the weal of humanity.  He hopes
unceasingly for good books to be born.

"My business, you see, is different from most.  I only deal in
second-hand books; I only buy books that I consider have some honest
reason for existence.  In so far as human judgment can discern, I try
to keep trash out of my shelves.  A doctor doesn't traffic in quack
remedies.  I don't traffic in bogus books.

"A comical thing happened the other day.  There is a certain wealthy
man, a Mr. Chapman, who has long frequented this shop----"

"I wonder if that could be Mr. Chapman of the Chapman Daintybits
Company?" said Gilbert, feeling his feet touch familiar soil.

"The same, I believe," said Mifflin.  "Do you know him?"

"Ah," cried the young man with reverence.  "There is a man who can tell
you the virtues of advertising.  If he is interested in books, it is
advertising that made it possible.  We handle all his copy--I've
written a lot of it myself.  We have made the Chapman prunes a staple
of civilization and culture.  I myself devised that slogan 'We preen
ourselves on our prunes' which you see in every big magazine.  Chapman
prunes are known the world over.  The Mikado eats them once a week.
The Pope eats them.  Why, we have just heard that thirteen cases of
them are to be put on board the George Washington for the President's
voyage to the peace Conference.  The Czecho-Slovak armies were fed
largely on prunes.  It is our conviction in the office that our
campaign for the Chapman prunes did much to win the war."

"I read in an ad the other day--perhaps you wrote that, too?" said the
bookseller, "that the Elgin watch had won the war.  However, Mr.
Chapman has long been one of my best customers.  He heard about the
Corn Cob Club, and though of course he is not a bookseller he begged to
come to our meetings.  We were glad to have him do so, and he has
entered into our discussions with great zeal.  Often he has offered
many a shrewd comment.  He has grown so enthusiastic about the
bookseller's way of life that the other day he wrote to me about his
daughter (he is a widower).  She has been attending a fashionable
girls' school where, he says, they have filled her head with absurd,
wasteful, snobbish notions.  He says she has no more idea of the
usefulness and beauty of life than a Pomeranian dog.  Instead of
sending her to college, he has asked me if Mrs. Mifflin and I will take
her in here to learn to sell books.  He wants her to think she is
earning her keep, and is going to pay me privately for the privilege of
having her live here.  He thinks that being surrounded by books will
put some sense in her head.  I am rather nervous about the experiment,
but it is a compliment to the shop, isn't it?"

"Ye gods," cried Gilbert, "what advertising copy that would make!"

At this point the bell in the shop rang, and Mifflin jumped up.  "This
part of the evening is often rather busy," he said.  "I'm afraid I'll
have to go down on the floor.  Some of my habitues rather expect me to
be on hand to gossip about books."

"I can't tell you how much I've enjoyed myself," said Gilbert.  "I'm
going to come again and study your shelves."

"Well, keep it dark about the young lady," said the bookseller.  "I
don't want all you young blades dropping in here to unsettle her mind.
If she falls in love with anybody in this shop, it'll have to be Joseph
Conrad or John Keats!"

As he passed out, Gilbert saw Roger Mifflin engaged in argument with a
bearded man who looked like a college professor.  "Carlyle's Oliver
Cromwell?" he was saying.  "Yes, indeed!  Right over here!  Hullo,
that's odd!  It WAS here."



Chapter II

The Corn Cob Club[1]


[1] The latter half of this chapter may be omitted by all readers who
are not booksellers.


The Haunted Bookshop was a delightful place, especially of an evening,
when its drowsy alcoves were kindled with the brightness of lamps
shining on the rows of volumes.  Many a passer-by would stumble down
the steps from the street in sheer curiosity; others, familiar
visitors, dropped in with the same comfortable emotion that a man feels
on entering his club.  Roger's custom was to sit at his desk in the
rear, puffing his pipe and reading; though if any customer started a
conversation, the little man was quick and eager to carry it on.  The
lion of talk lay only sleeping in him; it was not hard to goad it up.

It may be remarked that all bookshops that are open in the evening are
busy in the after-supper hours.  Is it that the true book-lovers are
nocturnal gentry, only venturing forth when darkness and silence and
the gleam of hooded lights irresistibly suggest reading?  Certainly
night-time has a mystic affinity for literature, and it is strange that
the Esquimaux have created no great books.  Surely, for most of us, an
arctic night would be insupportable without O. Henry and Stevenson.
Or, as Roger Mifflin remarked during a passing enthusiasm for Ambrose
Bierce, the true noctes ambrosianae are the noctes ambrose bierceianae.

But Roger was prompt in closing Parnassus at ten o'clock.  At that hour
he and Bock (the mustard-coloured terrier, named for Boccaccio) would
make the round of the shop, see that everything was shipshape, empty
the ash trays provided for customers, lock the front door, and turn off
the lights.  Then they would retire to the den, where Mrs. Mifflin was
generally knitting or reading.  She would brew a pot of cocoa and they
would read or talk for half an hour or so before bed.  Sometimes Roger
would take a stroll along Gissing Street before turning in.  All day
spent with books has a rather exhausting effect on the mind, and he
used to enjoy the fresh air sweeping up the dark Brooklyn streets,
meditating some thought that had sprung from his reading, while Bock
sniffed and padded along in the manner of an elderly dog at night.

While Mrs. Mifflin was away, however, Roger's routine was somewhat
different.  After closing the shop he would return to his desk and with
a furtive, shamefaced air take out from a bottom drawer an untidy
folder of notes and manuscript.  This was the skeleton in his closet,
his secret sin.  It was the scaffolding of his book, which he had been
compiling for at least ten years, and to which he had tentatively
assigned such different titles as "Notes on Literature," "The Muse on
Crutches," "Books and I," and "What a Young Bookseller Ought to Know."
It had begun long ago, in the days of his odyssey as a rural book
huckster, under the title of "Literature Among the Farmers," but it had
branched out until it began to appear that (in bulk at least) Ridpath
would have to look to his linoleum laurels.  The manuscript in its
present state had neither beginning nor end, but it was growing
strenuously in the middle, and hundreds of pages were covered with
Roger's minute script.  The chapter on "Ars Bibliopolae," or the art of
bookselling, would be, he hoped, a classic among generations of book
vendors still unborn.  Seated at his disorderly desk, caressed by a
counterpane of drifting tobacco haze, he would pore over the
manuscript, crossing out, interpolating, re-arguing, and then referring
to volumes on his shelves.  Bock would snore under the chair, and soon
Roger's brain would begin to waver.  In the end he would fall asleep
over his papers, wake with a cramp about two o'clock, and creak
irritably to a lonely bed.

All this we mention only to explain how it was that Roger was dozing at
his desk about midnight, the evening after the call paid by Aubrey
Gilbert.  He was awakened by a draught of chill air passing like a
mountain brook over his bald pate.  Stiffly he sat up and looked about.
The shop was in darkness save for the bright electric over his head.
Bock, of more regular habit than his master, had gone back to his couch
in the kitchen, made of a packing case that had once coffined a set of
the Encyclopaedia Britannica.

"That's funny," said Roger to himself.  "Surely I locked the door?" He
walked to the front of the shop, switching on the cluster of lights
that hung from the ceiling.  The door was ajar, but everything else
seemed as usual.  Bock, hearing his footsteps, came trotting out from
the kitchen, his claws rattling on the bare wooden floor.  He looked up
with the patient inquiry of a dog accustomed to the eccentricities of
his patron.

"I guess I'm getting absent-minded," said Roger.  "I must have left the
door open."  He closed and locked it.  Then he noticed that the terrier
was sniffing in the History alcove, which was at the front of the shop
on the left-hand side.

"What is it, old man?" said Roger.  "Want something to read in bed?" He
turned on the light in that alcove.  Everything appeared normal.  Then
he noticed a book that projected an inch or so beyond the even line of
bindings.  It was a fad of Roger's to keep all his books in a flat row
on the shelves, and almost every evening at closing time he used to run
his palm along the backs of the volumes to level any irregularities
left by careless browsers.  He put out a hand to push the book into
place.  Then he stopped.

"Queer again," he thought.  "Carlyle's Oliver Cromwell!  I looked for
that book last night and couldn't find it.  When that professor fellow
was here.  Maybe I'm tired and can't see straight.  I'll go to bed."


The next day was a date of some moment.  Not only was it Thanksgiving
Day, with the November meeting of the Corn Cob Club scheduled for that
evening, but Mrs. Mifflin had promised to get home from Boston in time
to bake a chocolate cake for the booksellers.  It was said that some of
the members of the club were faithful in attendance more by reason of
Mrs. Mifflin's chocolate cake, and the cask of cider that her brother
Andrew McGill sent down from the Sabine Farm every autumn, than on
account of the bookish conversation.

Roger spent the morning in doing a little housecleaning, in preparation
for his wife's return.  He was a trifle abashed to find how many
mingled crumbs and tobacco cinders had accumulated on the dining-room
rug.  He cooked himself a modest lunch of lamb chops and baked
potatoes, and was pleased by an epigram concerning food that came into
his mind.  "It's not the food you dream about that matters," he said to
himself; "it's the vittles that walk right in and become a member of
the family." He felt that this needed a little polishing and
rephrasing, but that there was a germ of wit in it.  He had a habit of
encountering ideas at his solitary meals.

After this, he was busy at the sink scrubbing the dishes, when he was
surprised by feeling two very competent arms surround him, and a pink
gingham apron was thrown over his head.  "Mifflin," said his wife, "how
many times have I told you to put on an apron when you wash up!"

They greeted each other with the hearty, affectionate simplicity of
those congenially wedded in middle age.  Helen Mifflin was a buxom,
healthy creature, rich in good sense and good humour, well nourished
both in mind and body.  She kissed Roger's bald head, tied the apron
around his shrimpish person, and sat down on a kitchen chair to watch
him finish wiping the china.  Her cheeks were cool and ruddy from the
keen air, her face lit with the tranquil satisfaction of those who have
sojourned in the comfortable city of Boston.

"Well, my dear," said Roger, "this makes it a real Thanksgiving.  You
look as plump and full of matter as The Home Book of Verse."

"I've had a stunning time," she said, patting Bock who stood at her
knee, imbibing the familiar and mysterious fragrance by which dogs
identify their human friends.  "I haven't even heard of a book for
three weeks.  I did stop in at the Old Angle Book Shop yesterday, just
to say hullo to Joe Jillings.  He says all booksellers are crazy, but
that you are the craziest of the lot.  He wants to know if you're
bankrupt yet."

Roger's slate-blue eyes twinkled.  He hung up a cup in the china closet
and lit his pipe before replying.

"What did you say?"

"I said that our shop was haunted, and mustn't be supposed to come
under the usual conditions of the trade."

"Bully for you!  And what did Joe say to that?"

"'Haunted by the nuts!'"

"Well," said Roger, "when literature goes bankrupt I'm willing to go
with it.  Not till then.  But by the way, we're going to be haunted by
a beauteous damsel pretty soon.  You remember my telling you that Mr.
Chapman wants to send his daughter to work in the shop?  Well, here's a
letter I had from him this morning."

He rummaged in his pocket, and produced the following, which Mrs.
Mifflin read:


DEAR MR.  MIFFLIN,

I am so delighted that you and Mrs. Mifflin are willing to try the
experiment of taking my daughter as an apprentice.  Titania is really a
very charming girl, and if only we can get some of the "finishing
school" nonsense out of her head she will make a fine woman.  She has
had (it was my fault, not hers) the disadvantage of being brought up,
or rather brought down, by having every possible want and whim
gratified.  Out of kindness for herself and her future husband, if she
should have one, I want her to learn a little about earning a living.
She is nearly nineteen, and I told her if she would try the bookshop
job for a while I would take her to Europe for a year afterward.

As I explained to you, I want her to think she is really earning her
way.  Of course I don't want the routine to be too hard for her, but I
do want her to get some idea of what it means to face life on one's
own.  If you will pay her ten dollars a week as a beginner, and deduct
her board from that, I will pay you twenty dollars a week, privately,
for your responsibility in caring for her and keeping your and Mrs.
Mifflin's friendly eyes on her.  I'm coming round to the Corn Cob
meeting to-morrow night, and we can make the final arrangements.

Luckily, she is very fond of books, and I really think she is looking
forward to the adventure with much anticipation.  I overheard her
saying to one of her friends yesterday that she was going to do some
"literary work" this winter.  That's the kind of nonsense I want her to
outgrow.  When I hear her say that she's got a job in a bookstore, I'll
know she's cured.

                                   Cordially yours,
                                         GEORGE CHAPMAN.


"Well?" said Roger, as Mrs. Mifflin made no comment.  "Don't you think
it will be rather interesting to get a naive young girl's reactions
toward the problems of our tranquil existence?"

"Roger, you blessed innocent!" cried his wife.  "Life will no longer be
tranquil with a girl of nineteen round the place.  You may fool
yourself, but you can't fool me.  A girl of nineteen doesn't REACT
toward things.  She explodes.  Things don't 'react' anywhere but in
Boston and in chemical laboratories.  I suppose you know you're taking
a human bombshell into the arsenal?"

Roger looked dubious.  "I remember something in Weir of Hermiston about
a girl being 'an explosive engine,'" he said.  "But I don't see that
she can do any very great harm round here.  We're both pretty well
proof against shell shock.  The worst that could happen would be if she
got hold of my private copy of Fireside Conversation in the Age of
Queen Elizabeth.  Remind me to lock it up somewhere, will you?"

This secret masterpiece by Mark Twain was one of the bookseller's
treasures.  Not even Helen had ever been permitted to read it; and she
had shrewdly judged that it was not in her line, for though she knew
perfectly well where he kept it (together with his life insurance
policy, some Liberty Bonds, an autograph letter from Charles Spencer
Chaplin, and a snapshot of herself taken on their honeymoon) she had
never made any attempt to examine it.

"Well," said Helen; "Titania or no Titania, if the Corn Cobs want their
chocolate cake to-night, I must get busy.  Take my suitcase upstairs
like a good fellow."


A gathering of booksellers is a pleasant sanhedrim to attend.  The
members of this ancient craft bear mannerisms and earmarks just as
definitely recognizable as those of the cloak and suit business or any
other trade.  They are likely to be a little--shall we say--worn at the
bindings, as becomes men who have forsaken worldly profit to pursue a
noble calling ill rewarded in cash.  They are possibly a trifle
embittered, which is an excellent demeanour for mankind in the face of
inscrutable heaven.  Long experience with publishers' salesmen makes
them suspicious of books praised between the courses of a heavy meal.

When a publisher's salesman takes you out to dinner, it is not
surprising if the conversation turns toward literature about the time
the last of the peas are being harried about the plate.  But, as Jerry
Gladfist says (he runs a shop up on Thirty-Eighth Street) the
publishers' salesmen supply a long-felt want, for they do now and then
buy one a dinner the like of which no bookseller would otherwise be
likely to commit.

"Well, gentlemen," said Roger as his guests assembled in his little
cabinet, "it's a cold evening.  Pull up toward the fire.  Make free
with the cider.  The cake's on the table.  My wife came back from
Boston specially to make it."

"Here's Mrs. Mifflin's health!" said Mr. Chapman, a quiet little man
who had a habit of listening to what he heard.  "I hope she doesn't
mind keeping the shop while we celebrate?"
